src/README.md, before:

# Jupyter notebook source files

This folder contains what we call `source files` for the Jupyter notebooks in the home directory of this repo.

## What are notebook source files?

Notebook meta data and outputs are removed and the remaining content is converted into markdown format - this is then a `source file`.

## Why do we need notebook source files?
Without some kind of source file, version control of notebooks is extremely difficult.

## How are these source files created?

The files are automatically generated using [Jupytext](https://github.com/mwouts/jupytext) in conjunction with Jupyter Lab.

Jupytext has a nice [online demo](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/mwouts/jupytext/master?urlpath=lab/tree/demo/get_started.ipynb) to help you get familiar with the [Jupytext commands](https://github.com/mwouts/jupytext#jupytext-commands-in-jupyterlab).



## How do I create source files locally?

A simple `pip install jupytext` should be all you need to activate the Jupytext commands in your local Jupyter lab. If this doesn't work then go to `settings`, `enable extension manager`. From there you can search for and install the Jupytext plugin manually.

If you follow the instructions in the [online demo](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/mwouts/jupytext/master?urlpath=lab/tree/demo/get_started.ipynb)  then you will generate some nice source files. The final step that's required to place the source files inside a subdirectory called `src` is to open up the notebook as a raw text file, navigate to the bottom and modify the jupytext part of the meta data to look like this:

```
"jupytext": {
   "formats": "ipynb,src//md"
  }
```

I'm sorry for this last part - it a bit annoying, but currently unavoidable.

Commit message:

Updates jupytext documentation to make it clearer

src/README.md, after:

# Jupyter notebook source files

This folder contains what we call `source files` for the Jupyter notebooks in the home directory of this repo.

## What are notebook source files?

Notebook meta data and outputs are removed and the remaining content is converted into markdown format - this is then a `source file`.

## Why do we need notebook source files?
Without some kind of source file, version control of notebooks is extremely difficult.





## How do I create / update source files?

We use [Jupytext](https://github.com/mwouts/jupytext) to pair `.ipynb` files with `.md` files. Once the pairing is set-up once, you'll never have to worry about it again - the two files will be kept in sync.

You'll need to have `jupytext` installed and also the jupytext jupyter lab extension. A simple `pip install jupytext` should sort out both requirements.

To check this has worked, open the command palette in jupyter lab via `View -> Activate Command Palette` and type `jupytext`. If you see references to e.g. "Pair Notebook..." then all is good. If this doesn't work, go to `Settings -> Enable Extension Manager`. From there, you can search for and install the Jupytext plugin manually via `View -> Extension Manager`.

To pair a notebook with a source file and make sure that source file ends up in the `src` folder:
- Open a new notebook
- Open the command palette
- Type `Pair Notebook` and select `Pair Notebook with Markdown` option
- Close the notebook
- Open the notebook in a plain text editor
- Navigate to the bottom and modify the jupytext part of the meta data to look like this:
  ```
  "jupytext": {
    "formats": "ipynb,src//md"
    }
  ```
- Open the notebook in Jupyter lab and hit the save button - a new source file should appear in the `src` folder
- Delete any additional source files that might have been accidentally created in the root directory
- Commit your changes to the repo
